Lecture 1: Basics, IaaS, PaaS, SaaS

# Advantages of Cloud Computing
IaaS leads to lower computer costs:
- You do not need a high-powered and high-priced computer to run
 cloud computing's web-based applications.
- Since applications run in the cloud, not on the desktop PC, your desktop PC does not need the processing power or hard disk space demanded by traditional desktop software.
- When you are using web-based applications, your PC can be less expensive, with a smaller hard disk, less memory, more efficient processor...
- In fact, your PC in this scenario does not even need a CD or DVD drive, as no software programs have to be loaded and no document files need to be saved.
IaaS leads to unlimited storage capacity:
Cloud computing offers virtually limitless storage. Your computer’s current 1 Tbyte hard drive is small compared to the hundreds of Pbytes available in the cloud.
IaaS leads to increased data reliability:
Unlike desktop computing, in which if a hard disk crashes and destroys all your valuable data, a computer crashing in the cloud should not affect the storage of your data. If your personal computer crashes, all your data is still out there in the cloud, still accessible.
In a world where few individual desktop PC users back up their data on a regular basis, cloud computing is a data-safe computing platform!
PaaS leads to improved performance:
With few large programs hogging your computer's memory, you will see better performance from your PC. Computers in a cloud computing system boot and run faster because they have fewer programs and processes loaded into memory.
SaaS leads to reduced software costs:
Instead of purchasing expensive software applications, you can get most of what you need for free-ish!
- most cloud computing applications today, such as the Google Docs suite. Better than paying for similar commercial software which alone may be justification for switching to cloud applications.
PaaS and SaaS take care of instant software updates:
Another advantage to cloud computing is that you are no longer faced with choosing between obsolete software and high upgrade costs.
With web-based applications (i.e., SaaS), updates happen automatically - available the next time you log into the cloud.
When you access a web-based application, you get the latest version without needing to pay for or download an upgrade.
SaaS leads to improved document format compatibility.
You do not have to worry about the documents you create on your machine being compatible with other users' applications or OSes
There are potentially no format incompatibilities when everyone is sharing documents and applications in the cloud.
SaaS leads to universal document access:
That is not a problem with cloud computing because you do not take your documents with you. Instead, they stay in the cloud, and you can access them whenever you have a computer and an Internet connection. Documents are instantly available from wherever you are.
SaaS leads to the latest version availability:
When you edit a document at home, that edited version is what you see when you access the document at work. The cloud always hosts the latest version of your documents - as long as you are connected, you are not in danger of having an outdated version.
SaaS leads to easier group collaboration:
Sharing documents leads directly to better collaboration. Many users do this as it is an important advantage of cloud computing.
- Multiple users can collaborate easily on documents and projects.
Device independence:
You are no longer tethered to a single computer or network. Changes to computers, applications, and documents follow you through the cloud. Move to a portable device, and your applications and documents are still available.
