Lecture 5a: Crowdsourcing in Cloud

Human-assisted Computation: Crowdsourcing
One of the first SaaS on Amazon Cloud
For the first time in human history, hundreds of millions of people can, via the Internet, easily collaborate on the same problem.

Human-In-Loop: Mechanical Turk
- The Turk, also known as the Mechanical Turk or Automaton Chess Player, was a fake chess-playing machine constructed in the late 18th century. From 1770 until its destruction by fire in 1854 it was exhibited by various owners as an automaton, though it was eventually revealed to be an elaborate hoax.
- Constructed and unveiled in 1770 by Wolfgang von Kempelen to impress the Empress Maria Theresa of Austria, the mechanism appeared to be able to play a strong game of chess against a human opponent, as well as perform the knight's tour, a puzzle that requires the player to move a knight to occupy every square of a chessboard exactly once. Even Napoleon (Emperor of France) played against it in 1809.
The diagram shows the chess-playing automaton, with a turbaned figure seated at a table, operating the chess pieces with one hand while the other hand rests on a cushion. The automaton is surrounded by a group of onlookers, who are observing the game with interest.
Once you’re inside, move the seat as far forward as you’re able.
The first thing the audience sees is the clockworks inside the left chamber.
Wait until you hear me shut the Left rear door, then go ahead.
The back set of clockworks are fake. They swing up as you slide backwards.
While those are being shown, the director is entirely inside the right chamber.
Go ahead.
But the wall—You’re now completely hidden from view.
The interior of the machine was very complicated and designed to mislead anyone who observed it. When opened on the left, the front doors of the cabinet exposed a number of gears and cogs, similar to clockwork. The section was designed so that if the back doors of the cabinet were open at the same time one could see through the machine.
The other side of the cabinet did not house machinery; instead it contained a red cushion and some removable parts, as well as brass structures. This area was designed to provide a clear line of vision through the machine. Underneath the robes of the Ottoman model, two other doors were hidden.
These also exposed clockwork machinery and provided a similarly unobstructed view through the machine. The design allowed the presenter of the machine to open every available door to the public. In this way, he could maintain the illusion.
The second half of the divider now hides your head while the left front door is open.
And because the left rear door is closed—
- In 2005, Amazon.com launched the Amazon Mechanical Turk (MTurk). The service was inspired, in part, by the way Kempelen's Mechanical Turk operated.
- MTurk provides companies with access to a marketplace of on-demand workers whenever a business needs them connecting to a variety of skill sets and capabilities via a global workforce.
- Organizations can harness the power of crowdsourcing via MTurk for a range of use cases, such as microwork, human insights, and machine learning development.
